ADR: CommonJS and ESM decision (#323)
expressjs/discussions: docs/adr/esm-support.md

- https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/297
- https://github.com/expressjs/express/discussions/6051
- https://github.com/jshttp/cookie/issues/211

## Decision

During the [working session](https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/320), we had an in-depth discussion about this topic. After careful consideration, we concluded that we will not make a dedicated effort to export our libraries in the ESM format. Instead, we will continue exporting the libraries as we have done historically. 

This decision is motivated by the lack of resources to maintain such an effort in the long term. It is also worth noting that Express was specifically designed to run with Node.js. While some of our libraries can run in other runtimes, this can currently be classified as an "unofficial and untested feature." Consequently, our CI systems do not include other runtimes as part of their testing workflows.

At present, our libraries function seamlessly in Node.js, supporting both CommonJS and ESM. Transitioning to support additional scenarios, such as direct ESM exports, would require significant changes to our CI systems and additional maintenance overhead.

> **TL;DR**: Dedicated ESM exports will not be available for [expressjs](https://github.com/expressjs), [pillarjs](https://github.com/pillarjs), or [jshttp](https://github.com/jshttp) packages. PRs with such a change will not be accepted.

Author: This part needs polishing. Soften the language and consider exporting ESM when it requires little effort. Include libraries maintained by @blakeembrey, which now include ESM export. It should be clear that our CI tests do not cover this for today.
"CommonJS is a requirement, but ESM is not"

Reviewer: Just making sure this is visible here, https://github.com/pillarjs/path-to-regexp which is maintained by @blakeembrey  does not support ESM in its exports. This was removed in v7. 

I don't understand why pillarjs is included in the scope of this ADR, when there is a very clear use case for this to still publish ESM for out of the box browser compatibility. These libraries are way more often completely agnostic to NodeJS, so the line of logic of this ADR that we don't need to support ESM for packages that are specifically designed for NodeJS, does not apply to these libraries.

Reviewer 2: I think we can just remove this paragraph entirely. This earlier statement captures reality:

> we will not make a dedicated effort to export our libraries in the ESM format

that doesn't mean that there is a blanket ban on ESM exports, it just means that as a project as a whole, we are not going down the path of making explicit efforts to go through all the packages and convert or add ESM exports

**What will be done?**

Future issues can be closed with a link to this document.

## Rationale

> CommonJS is the default syntax in Node.js. While the JavaScript ecosystem has increasingly moved toward ESM due to its compatibility with browsers, enhanced tree-shaking capabilities (coming from bundler tools), and support for dynamic imports, there are still complexities and challenges associated with ESM. 

Reviewer 3: If there is any document that supports the "default syntax" statement, it would be beneficial to link it. 

It seems to me that in Node, CJS is the _de facto_ standard because of its history but it's not set in stone. Especially with syntax detection enabled by default in all LTS versions after April 2025 (when 18 is gone) - [Node 20.19](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/release/v20.19.0#module-syntax-detection-is-now-enabled-by-default) has it enabled.

Reviewer 4: node’s own docs, the default value of the “type” field, the default value of node’s input-type arg… does it really require evidence when it’s so overwhelmingly the case?

Reviewer 3: This says absolutely nothing about what the project considers the default. But you know why? Let's go down the rabbit hole.

Back when the toggle was [first added](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/37162) it already had `mjs` put first into the Markdown and `cjs` below it. It still is the case to this day.

In author's own words:
> Enable code example using both modern ESM syntax and legacy CJS syntax.

Want more examples?
https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/37170
> This is done to put emphasis on the ESM and Promise model.

Commit message says:
> Convert examples to esm to help promote that pattern with users

Now, this only shows _intent_ from authors. But is much better case (in my opinion) than the toggle.

I'd rather this decision was based on evidence and not coincidence that some toggle defaults to this or that state. And this could as well be a "bug" to fix with the docs page.

Reviewer 4: The default is whatever happens without configuration with .js files, which is always CJS.

it is not a bug, it is an intentional decision that is unlikely to ever change because it would break too much of the ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: > The default is whatever happens without configuration with .js files, which is always CJS.

Let's do a test.

```sh
❯ mkdir testesm && cd testesm
❯ echo 'import {version} from "node:process"; console.log(version);' > test.js
❯ node test.js
```

Which will fail on node 18:
```
❯ /opt/homebrew/Cellar/node@18/18.20.8/bin/node test.js
(node:47428) Warning: To load an ES module, set "type": "module" in the package.json or use the .mjs extension.
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
/Users/user/Projects/testesm/test.js:1
import {version} from "node:process"; console.log(version);
^^^^^^

SyntaxError: Cannot use import statement outside a module
    at internalCompileFunction (node:internal/vm:76:18)
    at wrapSafe (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:1283:20)
    at Module._compile (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:1328:27)
    at Module._extensions..js (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:1422:10)
    at Module.load (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:1203:32)
    at Module._load (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:1019:12)
    at Function.executeUserEntryPoint [as runMain] (node:internal/modules/run_main:128:12)
    at node:internal/main/run_main_module:28:49

Node.js v18.20.8
```

But will have ABSOLUTELY NO ISSUE on 20+.

```
❯ node test.js
v20.19.0
```

Therefore it's not **_always_** CJS.

Let's extend the test further:
```sh
❯ echo '{"name": "testesm"}' > package.json
```

```
❯ node test.js
v20.19.0
(node:48221) [MODULE_TYPELESS_PACKAGE_JSON] Warning: Module type of file:///Users/user/Projects/testesm/test.js is not specified and it doesn't parse as CommonJS.
Reparsing as ES module because module syntax was detected. This incurs a performance overhead.
To eliminate this warning, add "type": "module" to /Users/user/Projects/testesm/package.json.
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

Even with _poorly packaged_ code your statement does not hold true and node.js does not default to CJS. Nothing breaks in the ecosystem. 

The only actual evidence of "default" would be here: https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/packages.html#introduction

> In particular, package authors should always include the ["type"](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/packages.html#type) field in their package.json files, even in packages where all sources are CommonJS. Being explicit about the type of the package will future-proof the package in case the default type of Node.js ever changes

And the `type` documentation is also misleading, as it states:
> import statements of .js files are treated as ES modules if the nearest parent package.json contains "type": "module"

Which is not true, because omitting `type` does not mean `commonjs` by default. 
```
❯ echo '{"name": "testesm", "type": "commonjs"}' > package.json
```
which breaks ESM inside `.js` files.

This shows that `no type != commonjs`. If there's any "default", it's "syntax detection".

Reviewer 4: You're right, that's fair that the default is now "syntax detection" for files. However, for the REPL, it's still CJS, and i think this sentence remains correct.

Reviewer 5: @slagiewka, If you disagree with the wording, please suggest an alternative and we can decide if it is a better fit. Otherwise I think we can resolve this thread, because I don't think nitpicking this wording choice is worth it if the goal is not to pick other words. Especially since these were chosen intentionally and are technically correct enough.

Reviewer 3: > Especially since these were chosen intentionally and are technically correct enough.

I'm yet to see it be proven technically correct. There is no default standard  in node.js and there is no suggested syntax for libraries to use. Granted, the state of lesser complexity is fairly new.

> nitpicking this wording choice

This is the leading statement that serves as the rationale for the decision. And at the time of writing is already hard to sustain. It may skew the decision towards suboptimal choice. However, I sense that everyone's mind is already set anyway.

> If you disagree with the wording, please suggest an alternative

Given the above, there are a couple of options:

1. Remove what can't be supported
```suggestion
While the JavaScript ecosystem has increasingly moved toward ESM due to its compatibility with browsers, enhanced tree-shaking capabilities (coming from bundler tools), and support for dynamic imports, there are still complexities and challenges associated with ESM. 
```
2. Try describing node's limbo.
```suggestion
CommonJS is still the dominating syntax in Node.js userland. While the JavaScript ecosystem has increasingly moved toward ESM due to its compatibility with browsers, enhanced tree-shaking capabilities (coming from bundler tools), and support for dynamic imports, there are still complexities and challenges associated with ESM. Node.js has only recently gained enough support for libraries to transition to ESM without requiring users to move away from CommonJS.
```

Reviewer 4: As I said, it's the default syntax in the repl, which should be sufficient to establish that it's the default syntax for node.

Also, node 18 isn 't EOL quite yet, and it will be years after that that libraries can painlessly transition to ESM.

Reviewer: @ljharb you're cherry picking things about NodeJS that still use CJS as a default due to historical reasons and not to cause needless breaking changes, as a way to support your argument that "CJS is the default syntax".

https://nodejs.org/en the homepage example uses ESM.
The NodeJS Docs for [CJS](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/modules.html) and [ESM](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/esm.html) respectively call:
- CJS: the **original** way to package JavaScript code for Node.js.
- ESM: the **official** standard format to package JavaScript code for reuse

There have been efforts to move to ESM as the defacto standard for many years now by the NodeJS ecosystem which is abundantly clear from Node's own developments towards this format.

What I'm seeing here is someone that is desperately picking at straws to support their anti-ESM crusade. I can only guess what your reasoning behind that is, I think most people in the NPM ecosystem are aware of this by now, but I fear the authors of this ADR are not..

Reviewer 6: > As I said, it's the default syntax in the repl, which should be sufficient to establish that it's the default syntax for node.

No, it means that it is the default syntax for the REPL, that is in no way reflective of the default behavior of imports, which now clearly default to module detection. And even if the REPL defaults to CommonJS, you can still import packages authored in ESM from it.

Reviewer 2: Please be mindful of our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md#contributor-covenant-30-code-of-conduct).

Specifically:

1. Respecting the **purpose of our community**, our activities, and our ways of gathering.
2. Engaging **kindly and honestly** with others.
3. Respecting **different viewpoints** and experiences.
4. **Taking responsibility** for our actions and contributions.
5. Gracefully giving and accepting **constructive feedback**.
6. Committing to **repairing harm** when it occurs.
7. Behaving in other ways that promote and sustain the **well-being of our community**.

Reviewer 2: The disputed text wasn't doing any heavy lifting in this doc and therefore doesn't warrant further discussion.  It has been removed.

Adopting ESM for our libraries would require a significant investment of time and resources to ensure proper implementation and long-term maintenance. While it is not impossible to achieve, it represents a considerable effort. Moreover, the majority of our users already utilize our libraries in their projects, relying on bundlers to handle the necessary transformations without issues.

- **Alternatives Considered:**
  - Alternative 1: Add ESM export to our libraries. CommonJS format is accepted by all most popular bundlers.
- **Why is this decision the best option?** Time and energy can be shifted to other topics.

## Consequences

- **Positive Impact**: It does not require to support another set of tools and one more major (or at least big) release.

> - **Negative Impact**:

Reviewer 3: I think it would be justified to acknowledge that the decision means that Express libraries will not be published to JSR (or any other registry that will be ESM-only).

Reviewer 2: I suggest that's somewhat out of scope. Yes, it would prevent publishing to certain registries, but which registries we use should not be coupled to this ADR.  We can't publish to maven either, but we don't need to point that out.

Reviewer 5: Agreed, calling this resolved.

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with this not being mentioned, but I would expect such thing to be at least **_acknowledged_**. That's just due diligence for making a technical decision, which this document is.

>  We can't publish to maven either, but we don't need to point that out.

This is _reductio ad absurdum_. We're talking about a well established (to say the least) JavaScript library/ecosystem and a registry/registries that are serving JavaScript in its TC39-defined standard.

  - No guarantee the packages work in browser environments.
  - Potential community library fork (to make it ESM-friendly) might lack security updates over time
  - OSS library authors that use our packages in ESM native libs might suffer from a lack of support
- **Mitigations**: Potential decision update for selected libraries (not specified yet) and exposing both types (CJS and ESM)

## References

Support for commonjs imports in ESM code is available in the node. Described in docs:
- https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html#interoperability-with-commonjs

> Support for ESM modules imports in commonjs is available since node v20 behind the experimental flag and node v23 without a flag. Docs:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Support for ESM modules imports in commonjs is available in modern Node.js versions. Docs:
```

Lets just drop the moving target and reference the upstream docs.

- https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#loading-ecmascript-modules-using-require

## Changelog

Track changes or updates to this ADR over time. Include the date, author, and a brief description of each change.

> - **[2025-01-15]**: [@kjugi] - document init

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should track changes from before the ADR was approved and merged
